---
layout: post
title: spatstat 1.43-0 released
---

Today spatstat 1.43-0 'Mixed Effects' has been uploaded to
[CRAN](http://www.cran.r-project.org/web/packages/spatstat/) where
Windows and OSX binaries are also available. You can also download it
from the [github
repository](https://github.com/spatstat/spatstat/releases/tag/v1.43-0).
The main changes are (full release notes
[here](releasenotes/spatstat-1.43-0.html)):

* spatstat now depends on the package 'nlme'.
* spatstat now depends on R 3.2.2 or later.
* Simulation algorithms have been accelerated; simulation outcomes are *not* identical to those obtained from previous versions of spatstat. 
* Determinantal point process models.
* Random-effects and mixed-effects models for replicated patterns.
* Dao-Genton test, and corresponding simulation envelopes.
* Simulated annealing and simulated tempering.
* spatstat colour tools now handle transparent colours.
* Improvements to "[" and subset() methods
* Extensions to kernel smoothing on a linear network.
* Support for one-dimensional smoothing kernels.
* Bug fix in Metropolis-Hastings simulation.
* Mark correlation function may include weights.
* Cross-correlation version of the mark correlation function.
* Variance calculations for replicated patterns.
* Penttinen pairwise interaction model.
* Contour plots with colours determined by a colour map.
* New dataset: Australian states and territories.
* More support for multi-dimensional point patterns.
* Minor improvements and bug fixes.
